importing test transactions (#773)
aptos-labs/developer-docs: apps/nextra/pages/en/build/indexer/indexer-sdk/documentation/advanced-tutorials/txn-importer.mdx

---
title: "Aptos Transaction Import"
---

## Overview

This will guide how to generate test transactions using the `aptos-indexer-transactions-generator` tool for Aptos networks (Devnet/Testnet/Mainnet). These transactions are then used in automated tests, local development, or regression checks.

## General Flow of Transaction Importing

> First, identify the transaction versions you need to fetch from the Aptos network. This tool interacts with the [Transaction Stream](https://aptos.dev/en/build/indexer/txn-stream) to retrieve transaction data in JSON format. The transactions are then consolidated into a Rust file, where each transaction is represented as a constant variable. These constants can be seamlessly used as mocked inputs in a testing framework. During testing, the processor fetches the specified transactions, processes them, and writes the results to a database. You can then verify the outcomes by loading the written data and validating it against the expected schema.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First, identify the transaction versions you need to fetch from the Aptos network. This tool interacts with the [Transaction Stream](https://aptos.dev/en/build/indexer/txn-stream) to retrieve transaction data in JSON format. The transactions are then consolidated into a Rust file, where each transaction is represented as a constant variable. These constants can be seamlessly used as mocked inputs in processor automated tests. During testing, the processor fetches the specified transactions, processes them, and writes the results to a database. You can then verify the outcomes by loading the written data and validating it against the expected data.
```

## Prerequisites

> 1. Access to a Network (Testnet/Mainnet):
>     - A valid API key for the gRPC endpoint. ([Refer here](https://aptos.dev/en/build/indexer/txn-stream/aptos-hosted-txn-stream))

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. A valid API key to connect to [Transaction Stream](https://aptos.dev/en/build/indexer/txn-stream/aptos-hosted-txn-stream)
```

2. Clone the [aptos-core](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core) repository:
    - Navigate to the `aptos-core/ecosystem/indexer-grpc/indexer-transaction-generator` directory.

> ## Steps

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## How to Import Test Transactions
```

### 1. Specify Versions to Import

> Locate and open the file:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Locate and make a copy of the file:
```

```bash
ecosystem/indexer-grpc/indexer-transaction-generator/imported_transactions/imported_transactions.yaml
```

In this file, specify the versions to import from Devnet|Testnet|Mainnet by configuring the appropriate endpoint, API key, and mapping version numbers to descriptive output names. An example configuration is shown below:

```yaml
testnet:
  transaction_stream_endpoint: https://grpc.testnet.aptoslabs.com:443
  api_key: TESTNET_API_KEY  # <--- Replace this with your API key to generate files locally

>   versions_to_import:
>     1: 1_genesis

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  versions_to_import:
    # Replace these with the versions you want to import
    1: 1_genesis
```

    2: 2_new_block_event
    3: 3_empty_txn
    278556781: 278556781_v1_coin_register_fa_metadata
    1255836496: 1255836496_v2_fa_metadata_
    5979639459: 5979639459_coin_register
    5992795934: 5992795934_fa_activities
    5523474016: 5523474016_validator_txn

mainnet:
  transaction_stream_endpoint: https://grpc.mainnet.aptoslabs.com:443
  api_key: MAINNET_API_KEY
  versions_to_import:
    308783012: 308783012_fa_transfer
```

### 2. Run the Command to Import Transactions

Navigate to the `indexer-transaction-generator` directory:

```bash
cd aptos-core/ecosystem/indexer-grpc/indexer-transaction-generator
```

To import the specified transaction versions, execute the following command:

```bash

> cargo run -- --testing-folder ./imported_transactions --output-folder /path/to/your/processor-repo/src

Reviewer: ```suggestion
cargo run -- --testing-folder /path/to/your/imported_transactions.yaml --output-folder /path/to/your/processor-repo/src
```

4. Generate a Rust file (`generated_transactions.rs`) that converts the generated transaction JSON files into constant variables for use in tests.

Note: Replace /path/to/your/processor-repo with the path to your processor repository or preferred storage location.

**Explanation of Command Flags**
1. `--testing-folder`
What is the --testing-folder flag?
The --testing-folder flag specifies the directory containing the imported_transactions.yaml configuration file. The tool uses this folder to read versions you wish to import.
 - Ensure the folder path matches the location of your imported_transactions.yaml file.
 - By default, this guide assumes the configuration is stored in ./imported_transactions. Adjust the flag value if you place the file elsewhere.

2. `--output-folder`
Specifies the destination directory where the generated transaction JSON files and Rust constants will be saved.
 - Replace /path/to/your/processor-repo with your processor repository src directory or desired storage location.
 - Ensure this folder is part of your version control setup if these files need to be shared.

## How to Use the Testing Transactions

### Export the Generated File

> Update the `mod.rs` file to include the generated Rust file containing the transaction constants.

Reviewer: Do they need to create a `mod.rs` file in their processor repo if they don't have one?

[Reference mod.rs](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-indexer-processor-example/blob/main/test-transactions-example/src/json_transactions/mod.rs).

### Export the `json_transactions` Folder

> Ensure the `json_transactions` folder is properly exported in the library file.

Reviewer: Bit confused about this instruction and the "Export the Generated File" instruction. Do they need to add both to `mod.rs`? 
```
pub mod generated_transactions;
pub mod json_transactions;
```

Author: first one they need for sure, but the 2nd one could be slightly different. if they already have their own  file where they are exporting othe folders they can just add to there. should I just remove that part? I assume they will know how to export files..

Reviewer: Oh is this for generated_transactions to be able to read json_transactions? 

Then it makes sense to include `pub mod json_transactions` in the instructions, but we can add more details to explain why you need to do it and which folder to do it in. 

The previous step and this step refer to different repos, so it's a bit confusing to follow.

Author: yeah I add more details and update the url to use the same repo as teh step above!

[Reference lib.rs](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-indexer-processor-example/blob/main/test-transactions-example/src/lib.rs).

### Add as a Dependency

> Include the crate containing the generated transactions as a dependency in the `Cargo.toml` file of your test crate. (Internally, we store transactions in `aptos-core` and use them in the [processor repo](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-indexer-processors/blob/0c92d323b0f560b5f8601a831a36520ad9b72d68/rust/Cargo.toml#L34)).

Reviewer: Users have the choice of `--output-folder`, they could put it in a new crate or existing crate, so I think we can skip this step in this guide.

## Steps

### 1. Specify Versions to Import

Locate and open the file:

```bash
ecosystem/indexer-grpc/indexer-transaction-generator/imported_transactions/imported_transactions.yaml
```

In this file, specify the versions to import from Devnet|Testnet|Mainnet by configuring the appropriate endpoint, API key, and mapping version numbers to descriptive output names. An example configuration is shown below:

```yaml
testnet:
  transaction_stream_endpoint: https://grpc.testnet.aptoslabs.com:443
  api_key: TESTNET_API_KEY  # <--- Replace this with your API key to generate files locally
  versions_to_import:
    1: 1_genesis
    2: 2_new_block_event
    3: 3_empty_txn
    278556781: 278556781_v1_coin_register_fa_metadata
    1255836496: 1255836496_v2_fa_metadata_
    5979639459: 5979639459_coin_register
    5992795934: 5992795934_fa_activities
    5523474016: 5523474016_validator_txn

mainnet:
  transaction_stream_endpoint: https://grpc.mainnet.aptoslabs.com:443
  api_key: MAINNET_API_KEY
  versions_to_import:
    308783012: 308783012_fa_transfer
```

### 2. Run the Command to Import Transactions

To import the specified transaction versions, execute the following command:

```bash

> cargo run -- --testing-folder ./imported_transactions --output-folder ../indexer-test-transactions/src/

Reviewer: what is `--testing-folder` flag used for and how should they configure it?

> cargo run -- --testing-folder ./imported_transactions --output-folder ../indexer-test-transactions/src/

Reviewer: also in which folder can the user run this command?

```

This command will:

1. Read the configuration from the `imported_transactions.yaml` file.
2. Fetch the specified transaction versions from the selected network (Testnet or Mainnet).

> 3. Store the resulting JSON files in the specified output folder (`../indexer-test-transactions/src/json_transactions`).

Reviewer: i think we need to tell them where the output folder should be. they probably don't want to store the test txn's in aptos-core and instead commit it somewhere, like their processor repo.

4. Generate a Rust file (`generated_transactions.rs`) that converts the generated transaction JSON files into constant variables for use in tests.

## How to Use the Testing Transactions

### Export the Generated File

Update the `mod.rs` file to include the generated Rust file containing the transaction constants.

[Reference mod.rs](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-indexer-processor-example/blob/main/test-transactions-example/src/json_transactions/mod.rs).

### Export the `json_transactions` Folder

Ensure the `json_transactions` folder is properly exported in the library file.

[Reference lib.rs](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-indexer-processor-example/blob/main/test-transactions-example/src/lib.rs).

### Add as a Dependency

Include the crate containing the generated transactions as a dependency in the `Cargo.toml` file of your test crate. (Internally, we store transactions in `aptos-core` and use them in the [processor repo](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-indexer-processors/blob/0c92d323b0f560b5f8601a831a36520ad9b72d68/rust/Cargo.toml#L34)).

### Integrate into Test Cases

> Use the exported transaction constants directly in your test cases to simulate real transactions and validate processing logic.

Reviewer: this would be a good place to link to the next doc that outlines how to write processor tests (once it's ready)
